           11/3/71                                NM (I)
       NAME        nm -- get name list
       SYNOPSIS    nm [ name ]
       DESCRIPTION nm prints the symbol table from the output file of an
                   assembler or loader run. Only relocatable, global, and
                   undefined symbols-- not absolute-- are given. Each defined
                   symbol is preceded by its value; each undefined symbol by
                   blanks. Global symbols have their first character
                   underlined. The output is sorted alphabetically.
                   If no file is given, the symbols in a.out are listed.
       FILES       a.out
       SEE ALSO    as, ld
       DIAGNOSTICS`"?"
       BUGS
       OWNER       dmr, ken
           11/3/71                                OD (I)
       NAME        od -- octal dump
       SYNOPSIS    od name [ origin ]
       DESCRIPTION od dumps a file in octal, eight words per line with the
                   origin of the line on the left. If an octal origin is given
                   it is truncated to 0 mod 16 and dumping starts from there,
                   otherwise from 0. Printing continues until halted by
                   sending an interrupt signal.
       FILES
       SEE ALSO    db
       DIAGNOSTICS
       BUGS        Dumping does not cease at the end of the file; instead the
                   file appears to be padded with garbage to a length of 511
                   mod 512 bytes.
       OWNER       ken, dxnr
           11/3/71                                PR (I)
       NAME        pr -- print file
       SYNOPSIS    pr [ —1cm ] name1 ...
       DESCRIPTION produces a printed listing of one or more files. The output
                   is separated into pages headed by the name of the file, a
                   date, and the page number.
                   The optional flag — l causes each page to contain 78 lines
                   instead of the standard 66 to accommodate legal size paper.
                   The optional flags — c (current date) and — m (modified date)
                   specify which date will head all subsequent files. —m is
                   default.
       FILES       /dev/ttyn to suspend messages.
       SEE ALSO    cat, cp, mesg
       DIAGNOSTICS -- (files not found are ignored)
       BUGS        none
       OWNER       ken, dmr
           11/3/71                                REW (I)
       NAME        rew -- rewind tape
       SYNOPSIS    rew [ digit ]
       DESCRIPTION rew rewinds DECtape drives. The digit is the
                   logical tape number, and should range from 0 to
                   7. A missing digit indicates drive 0.
       FILES       /dev/tap0, ..., /dev/tap7
       SEE ALSO
       DIAGNOSTICS "?" if there is no tape mounted on the indicated drive or
                   if the file cannot be opened.
       BUGS
       OWNER       ken, dmr
           11/3/71                                RKD (I)
       NAME        rkd -- dump RK disk to tape
       SYNOPSIS    /etc/rkd
       DESCRIPTION rkd copies an RK03/RK05 disk pack onto nine DECtapes.
                   Physical I/O is done and interrupts are disabled, so time—
                   sharing is suspended during operation of the command.
                   The sequence of tape drives is: 0, 1, 0, 1, ....
                   rkd exits if 0 appears in the console switches.
       FILES       --
       SEE ALSO    rkl
       DIAGNOSTICS none; errors are retried forever
       BUGS
       OWNER      ken
           11/3/71                                RKF (I)
       NAME        rkf -- format RKO3 disk pack
       SYNOPSIS    rkf
       DESCRIPTION rkf formats a virgin disk pack. Because it destroys all
                   information on that pack, and because it is not interlocked
                   against file system activity on the pack, the rkf program
                   is not maintained in executable form. Instead the source
                   must be located and assembled.
       FILES       none (uses physical I/O on drive 0).
       SEE ALSO
       DIAGNOSTICS “error” is printed and a core image is produced if a write
                   error occurs. A copy of the RK status register is in
                   register 5.
       BUGS        As mentioned, is not interlocked against system I/O; if I/O
                   is already occurring, it will be badly disrupted. In any
                   event, all information on the pack is destroyed.
       OWNER       ken, dmr
           11/3/71                                RKL (I)
       NAME        rkl -- reload RK disk from tape
       SYNOPSIS    /etc/rkl
       DESCRIPTION rkl loads an RK03/RK05 disk pack from nine DECtapes.
                   The program uses physical I/O with interrupts disabled;
                   therefore time—sharing is suspended.
                   Only the super—user may invoke this command.
                   The sequence of drives is: 0, 1, 0, 1, .... rkl will cease
                   if 0 appears in the console switches.
       FILES
       SEE ALSO    rkd
       DIAGNOSTICS none; errors are retried forever
       BUGS        --
       OWNER       ken
           11/3/71                                RM (I)
       NAME        rm -- remove (unlink) files
       SYNOPSIS’   rm name1 ...
       DESCRIPTION rm removes the entries for one or more files from a
                   directory. If an entry was the last link to the file, the
                   file is destroyed. Removal of a file requires write
                   permission in its directory, but neither read nor write
                   permission on the file itself.
                   Directories cannot be removed by rm; cf. rmdir.
       FILES       none.
       SEE ALSO    rmdir, for removing directories.
       DIAGNOSTICS If the file cannot be removed or does not exist, the name
                   of the file followed by a question mark is typed.
       BUGS        rm probably should ask whether a read—only file is really
                   to be removed.
       OWNER       ken, dmr
           11/3/71                               RMDIR (I)
       NAME        rmdir -- remove directory
       SYNOPSIS    rmdir dir1 ...
       DESCRIPTION rmdir removes (deletes) directories. The directory must
                       empty (except for the standard entries "." and "..",
                       which rmdir itself removes). Write permission is
                       required in the directory in which the directory
                       appears.
       FILES       none
       SEE ALSO
       DIAGNOSTICS “dir?” is printed if directory dir cannot be found, is not
                   a directory, or is not removable.
                   “dir -- directory not empty" is printed if dir has entries
                   other than "." or "..".
       BUGS
       OWNER       ken, dmr
           11/3/71                               ROFF (I)
       NAME        roff -- format text
       SYNOPSIS    roff [ +number ] [ —number ] name1 ...
       DESCRIPTION roff formats text according to control lines embedded in
                   the text. The optional argument “+number” causes printing
                   to begin at the first  page with the appropriate number; —
                   number causes printing to cease at the first page with a
                   higher number.
                   roff is fully described in a separate publication
                   [reference].
       FILES       /etc/suftab contains a list of suffixes used to guide
                   hyphenation. / tmp/rtma, rtmb, ... temporary / dev/ttyn to
                   suspend messages.
       SEE ALSO    [reference],  mesg
       DIAGNOSTICS:none -- files not found are ignored
       BUGS        roff does not check for various kinds of buffer overflow.
                   If a fault occurs, check the input in the region where the
                   error occurred.
       OWNER       jfo, dmr, ken
           11/3/71                               SDATE (I)
       NAME        sdate -- set date and time
       SYNOPSIS    sdate mmddhhmm
       DESCRIPTION sdate adjusts the system’s idea of the date and time. mm is
                   the month number;  dd is the day number in the month; hh is
                   the hour number (24—hour system); mm is the minute number.
                   For example,
                           sdate 10080045
                   sets the date to Oct. 8, 12:45 AM.
       FILES none
       SEE ALSO    date
       DIAGNOSTICS "?" if the date is syntactically incorrect.
       BUGS        none
       OWNER       ken, dmr
           11/3/71                                SH (I)
       NAME        sh -- shell (command interpreter)
       SYNOPSIS    sh [ name [ arg1 ... [ arg9 ] ] ]
       DESCRIPTION sh is the standard command interpreter. It is the program
                   which reads and arranges the execution of the command lines
                   typed by most users. It may itself be called as a command
                   to interpret files of command lines. Before discussing the
                   arguments to the shell used as a command, the structure of
                   command lines themselves will be given.
                   Command lines are sequences of commands separated by
                   command delimiters. Each command is a sequence of non—blank
                   command arguments separated by blanks. The first argument
                   specifies the name of a command to be executed. Except for
                   certain types of special arguments discussed below, the
                   arguments other than the command name are simply passed to
                   the invoked command.
                   If the first argument represents the path name of an
                   executable file, it is invoked; otherwise the string
                   “/bin/” is prepended to the argument. (In this way the
                   standard commands, which reside in "/bin," are found.) If
                   this search too fails a diagnostic is printed.
                   The remaining non—special arguments are simply passed to
                   the command without further interpretation by the shell.
                   There are three command delimiters: the new line, ";" , and
                   "&". The semicolon ";" specifies sequential execution of
                   the commands so separated; that is,
                        coma; comb
                   causes the execution first of command coma, then of comb.
                   The ampersand “&“ causes simultaneous execution:
                        coma & comb
                   causes coma to be called, followed immediately by comb
                   without waiting for coma to finish. Thus coma and comb
                   execute simultaneously. As a special case,
                        coma &
                   causes coma to be executed and the shell immediately to
                   request another command without waiting for coma.
           11/3/71                                SH (I)
                   Two characters cause the immediately following string to be
                   interpreted as a special argument to the shell itself, not
                   passed to the command. An argument of the form <arg causes
                   the file arg to be used as the standard input file of the
                   given command; an argument of the form “>arg” causes file
                   “arg” to be used as the standard output file for the given
                   command.
                   If any argument contains either of the characters "?" or
                   "*" , it is treated specially as follows. The current
                   directory is searched for files which match the given
                   argument. The character "*" in an argument matches any
                   string of characters in a file name (including the null
                   string); ? matches any single character in a file name.
                   Other argument characters match only the same character in
                   the file name. For example, "*" matches all file names; "?"
                   matches all one—character file names; "ab*.s" matches all
                   file names beginning with "ab" and ending with ".s".
                   If the argument with "*" or "?" also contains a "/", a
                   slightly different procedure is used: instead of the
                   current directory, the directory used is the one obtained
                   by taking the argument up to the last "/" before a “*“ or
                   "?". The matching process matches the remainder of the
                   argument after this "/" against the files in the derived
                   directory. For example:, “/usr/dmr/a*.s” matches all files
                   in directory / usr/dmr which begin with "a” and end with
                   ".s"
                   In any event, a list of names is obtained which match the
                   argument. This list is sorted into alphabetical order, and
                   the resulting sequence of arguments replaces the single
                   argument containing the "*" or "?". The same process is
                   carried out for each argument with a * or ?“ (the resulting
                   lists are not merged) and finally the command is called
                   with the resulting list of arguments..
                                                   •
                   For example: directory /usr/dmr contains the files al  s,
                   a2.s, ..., a9.s. From any directory, the command
                   as /usr/dmr/a?.s
                   calls as with arguments / usr/dmr/al.s, /usr/dmr/a2.s, ...
                   /usr/dmr/a9.s in that order.
                   The character “\“ causes the immediately following
                   character to lose any special meaning it may have to the
                   shell; in this way < , , and other characters meaningful to
                   the shell may be passed as part of arguments. A special
                   case of
                      11/3/71                                                                          SH (I)
                                      this feature allows the continuation of commands onto more
                                      than one line: a new—line preceded by          “\“ is translated
                                      into a blank.
                                      Sequences of characters enclosed in double (") or single
                                      (') quotes are also taken literally.
                                      When the shell is invoked as a command, it has additional
                                      string processing capabilities. Recall that the form in
                                      which the whell is invoked is
                                               sh [ name [ arg1  ... [ arg9 ] ] ]
                                                                     
                                      The name is the name of a file which will be read and
                                      interpreted. If not given, this        subinstance of the shell
                                      will continue to read the standard input file.
                                      In the file, character sequences of the form           "$n", where n
                                      is a digit 0, ..., 9, are replaced by the nth argument to
                                      the invocation of the shell (       arg ). $0” is replaced by
                                      name.
                                      An end—of—file in the shell's input causes it to exit. A
                                      side effect of this fact means that the way to log out from
                                      UNIX is to type an end of file.
               FILES                  /etc/glob
               SEE ALSO               [reference], which gives the theory of operation of the
                                      shell.
               DIAGNOSTICS            “?", in case of any difficulty. The most common problem is
                                      inability to find the given command. Others: input file
                                      (“<“) cannot be found; no more processes can be created
                                      (this will alleviate itself with the passage of time). Note
                                      that no diagnostic is given for inability to create an
                                      output (">") file; the standard output file has already
                                      been closed when the condition is discovered and there is
                                      no place to write the diagnostic.
                                       If a "*" or “?“ is used, the "glob" routine is invoked; it
                                      types "No command" if it cannot find the given command, and
                                      “No match” if there were no files which matched an argument
                                      with "?" or "*".
               BUGS                   Better diagnostics should be provided. If a           "*" or “?“ is
                                       used, the command must be in /      bin (Not, for example, in the
                                       user’s directory.) This is actually a         glob bug.
               OWNER                  dmr, ken
           11/3/71                               STAT (I)
       NAME        stat -- get file status
       SYNOPSIS    stat name1
       DESCRIPTION stat gives several kinds of information about one or more
                   files:
                     i—number
                     access mode
                     number of links
                     owner
                     size in bytes
                     date and time of last modification
                     name (useful when several files are named)
                   All information is self—explanatory except the mode. The
                   mode is a six—character string whose characters mean the
                   following:
                     1 s: file is small (smaller than 4096 bytes)
                       l: file is large
                     2 d: file is a directory
                       x: file is executable
                       u: set user ID on execution
                       —: none of the above
                     3 r: owner can read
                       —: owner cannot read
                     4 w: owner can write
                       —: owner cannot write
                     5 r: non—owner can read
                       —: non—owner cannot read
                     6 w: non—owner can write
                       —: non—owner cannot write
                   The owner is almost always given in symbolic form; however
                   if he cannot be found in "/etc/uids" a number is given.
                   If the number of arguments to stat is not exactly 1 a
                   header is generated identifying the fields of the status
                   information.
       FILES       /etc/uids
       SEE ALSO    ls with the —1 option gives the same information as stat.
       DIAGNOSTICS "name?" for any error.
       BUGS        none
           11/3/71                               STRIP (I)
       NAME        strip -- remove symbols and relocation bits
       SYNOPSIS    strip name1
       DESCRIPTION strip removes the symbol table and relocation bits
                   ordinarily attached to the output of the assembler and
                   loader. This is useful to save space after a program has
                   been debugged.
                   The effect of strip is the same as use of the —s
                   option of ld.
       FILES       /tmp/stma, stmb ... temporary file
       SEE ALSO   ld, as
       DIAGNOSTICS Diagnostics are given for: non—existent argument; inability
                   to create temporary file; improper format (not an object
                   file); inability to re—read temporary file.
       BUGS
       OWNER       dmr
           11/3/71                                SU (I)
       NAME        su -- become privileged user
       SYNOPSIS    su password
       DESCRIPTION su allows one to become the super—user, who has all sorts
                   of marvelous powers. In order for su to do its magic, the
                   user must pass as an argument a password. If the password
                   is correct,  su will execute the shell with the UID set to
                   that of the super—user. To restore normal UID privileges,
                   type an end—of—file to the super—user shell
       FILES
       SEE ALSO    shell
       DIAGNOSTICS "Sorry" if password is wrong
       BUGS
       OWNER       dmr, ken
           11/3/71                                SUM (I)
       NAME        sum -- sum file
       SYNOPSIS    sum name
       DESCRIPTION sum sums the contents of a file. In practice, it is most
                   often used to verify that all of a DECtape can be read
                   without error.
       FILES       none
       SEE ALSO
       DIAGNOSTICS "?" if the file cannot be read at all or if an error is
                   discovered during the read.
       BUGS none
       OWNER       ken
           11/3/71                                TAP (I)
       NAME        tap -- manipulate DECtape
       SYNOPSIS    tap [ key ] [ name ... ]
       DESCRIPTION tap saves and restores selected portions of the file system
                   hierarchy on  DECtape. Its actions are controlled by the key
                   argument. The key is a string of characters containing at
                   most one function letter and possibly one or more function
                   modifiers. Other arguments to the command are file or
                   directory names specifying which files are to be dumped,
                   restored, or tabled.
                   The function portion of the key is specified by one of the
                   following letters:
                     r The indicated files and directories, together with
                       all subdirectories, are dumped onto the tape. If
                       files with the same names already exists, they are
                       replaced (hence the r ). "Same" is determined by
                       string comparison, so “./abc” can never be the same
                       as “/usr/dmr/abc even if “/ usr/dmr” is the current
                       directory. If no file argument is given, "/" is the
                       default.
                     u updates the tape.  u is the same as r, but a file is
                       replaced only if its modification date is later than
                       the date stored on the tape; that is to say, if it
                       has changed since it was dumped. u is the default
                       command if none is given.
                     d deletes the named files and directories
                       from the tape. At least one file argument must be
                       given.
                     x extracts the named files from the tape to the file
                       system. The owner, mode, and date—modified are
                       restored to what they were when the file was dumped.
                       If no file argument is given, the entire contents of
                       the tape are extracted.
                     t lists the names of all files stored on the tape
                       which are the same as or are hierarchically below
                       the file arguments. If no file argument is given,
                       the entire contents of the tape are tabled.
                     1 is the same as  t except that an expanded listing is
                       produced giving all the available information about
                       the listed files.
                   The following characters may be used in addition to the
                   letter which selects the function desired.
           11/3/71                                TAP (I)
                     0, ..., 7 This modifier selects the drive on which the
                       tape is mounted. “0” is the default.
                     v Normally tap does its work silently. The v (verbose)
                       option causes it to type the name of each file it
                       treats preceded by a letter to indicate what is
                       happening.
                         r file is being replaced
                         a file is being added (not there before)
                         x  file is being extracted
                         d file is being deleted
                       The v option can be used with r, u, d, and x only.
                     c means a fresh dump is being created; the
                       tape directory will be zeroed before beginning.
                       Usable only with  r and u.
                     f causes new entries copied on tape to be ‘fake’ in
                       that only the entries, not the data associated with
                       the entries are updated. Such fake entries cannot be
                       extracted. Usable only with r’ and u.
                     w causes tap to pause before treating each
                       file, type the indicative letter and the
                       file name (as with v) await the user’s response.
                       Response "y" means "yes", so the file is treated.
                       Null response means "no" , and the file does not
                       take part in whatever is being done. Response "x"
                       means exit ; the tap command terminates immediately.
                       In the x function, files previously asked about have
                       been extracted already. With r, u and d no change
                       has been made to the tape.
                     m make (create) directories during an x if necessary.
                     i ignore tape errors. It is suggested that this option
                       be used with caution to read
                       damaged tapes.
       FILES       /dev/tap0 ... /dev/tap7
       SEE ALSO    rk
       DIAGNOSTICS RK open error
                   RK read error
                   RK write error
                   Directory checksum
                   Directory overflow
           11/3/71                                TAP (I)
                   RK overflow
                   Phase error (a file has changed after it was selected for
                   dumping but before it was dumped)
       BUGS        All references to " RK" should read “tape.” The m option
                   does not work correctly in all cases. The i option is not
                   yet implemented.
       OWNER       ken
           11/3/71                                 TM(I)
       NAME        tm -- provide time information
       SYNOPSIS    tm [ command arg1 .... ]
       DESCRIPTION tm is used to provide timing information. When used without
                   an argument, output like the following is given:
                       tim            77:43:20 29.2
                       ovh     13:59:421.2
                       dsk     12:06:304.1
                       idl     352:31:3723.7
                       usr      3:32:150.1
                       der     5, 1710, 0
                   The first column of numbers gives totals in the named
                   categories since the last time the system was cold—booted;
                   the second column gives the changes since the last time tm
                   was invoked. The  tim row is total real time
                   (hours:minutes:seconds); unlike the other times, its origin
                   is the creation date of tm's temporary file.  ovh is time
                   spent executing in the system; dsk is time spent waiting
                   for both kinds of disk I/O; idl is idle time;  usr is user
                   execution time;  der is RF disk error count (left number)
                   and RK disk error count (right number).
                   tm can be invoked with arguments which are assumed to
                   constitute a command to be timed. In this case the output
                   is as follows:
                       tim     2.2
                       ovh     0.3
                       dsk     1.8
                       idl     0.0
                       usr     0.0
                   The given times represent the number of seconds spent in
                   each category during execution of the command.
       FILES       /tmp/ttmp, /dev/rf0 (for absolute times) contains the
                   information used to calculate the differential times.
       SEE ALSO    format of file system (which tells where the times come
                   from)
                                                  '
       DIAGNOSTICS "?" if the command cannot be executed; "can't creat temp
                   file” if trouble with /tmp; "cant read super—block" if
                   times cannot be read from system.
       BUGS        (1) when invoked w ith a command argument, everything going
                   on at the moment is counted, not just the command itself.
                   (2) Two users doing  tm
           11/3/71                                TM (I)
                   simultaneously interfere with each other’s use of the
                   temporary file.
       OWNER       ken, dmr
           11/3/71                                TTY (I)
       NAME        tty -- get tty name
       SYNOPSIS    tty
       DESCRIPTION tty gives the name of the user’s typewriter in the form
                   "ttyn” for n a_digit. The actual path name is then
                   "/dev/ttyn".
       FILES
       SEE ALSO
       DIAGNOSTICS "not a tty" if the standard input file is not a typewriter.
       BUGS
       OWNER       dmr, ken
           11/3/71                               TYPE (I)
       NAME        type -- type on 2741
       SYNOPSIS    type name1
       DESCRIPTION type produces output on an IBM 2741 terminal with a
                   Correspondence type ball.
                   type uses typewriter tty5, which, because of the lack of
                   access ports, is also used as a standard communication
                   channel. Therefore,  who should be used to verify the
                   absence of a user on tty5.
                   The method is as follows: type the type command. It will
                   wait until tty5 is  dialled up. When the phone answers,
                   depress the interrupt button after paper has been loaded,
                   and the first file will be typed. spaces out to the end of
                   a sheet of paper and waits until the interrupt button is
                   depressed before beginning each new file.
       FILES       /dev/tty5
       SEE ALSO    who
       DIAGNOSTICS
       BUGS        obviously some scheme is needed to prevent interference
                   between normal users and The best thing would be to support
                   2741’s as a standard terminal.
       OWNER       dmr
           11/3/71                              UMOUNT (I)
       NAME        umount -- dismount file system
       SYNOPSIS    umount special
       DESCRIPTION announces to the system that the removable file system
                   previously mounted on special file special is to be
                   removed.
                   Only the super—user may issue this command.
       FILES
       SEE ALSO    mount
       DIAGNOSTICS
       BUGS        This command should be restricted to the super—
                   user.
       OWNER       ken, dmr
           11/3/71                                UN (I)
       NAME        un -- undefined symbols
       SYNOPSIS    un [ name ]
       DESCRIPTION un prints a list of undefined symbols from an assembly or
                   loader run. If the file argument is not specified, a out is
                   the default. Names are listed alphabetically except that
                   non—global symbols come first. Undefined global symbols
                   (unresolved external references) have their first character
                   underlined.
       FILES       a.out
       SEE ALSO    as, ld
       DIAGNOSTICS "?" if the file cannot be found.
       BUGS
       OWNER       dmr, ken
