        11/3/71                                   WC (I)
        NAME       wc -- get (English) word count
        SYNOPSIS   wc name1 ...
        DESCRIPTIONwc provides a count of the words, text lines, and roff
                   control lines for each argument file.
                   A text line is a sequence of characters not beginning with
                   "." and ended by a new—line. A roff control line is a line
                   beginning with ".". A word is a sequence of characters
                   bounded by the beginning of a line, by the end of a line,
                   or by a blank or a tab.
        FILES
        SEE ALSO   roff
        DIAGNOSTICSnone; arguments not found are ignored.
        BUGS
        OWNER      jfo
           11/3/71                                WHO (I)
        NAME       who -- who is on the system
        SYNOPSIS   who
        DESCRIPTION who lists the name, typewriter channel, and login time for
                   each current UNIX user.
        FILES      /tmp/utmp contains the necessary information; it is
                   maintained by  init,
        SEE ALSO   /etc/init
        DIAGNOSTICS
        BUGS
        OWNER      dmr, ken
           11/3/71                               WRITE (I)
        NAME       write -- write to another user
        SYNOPSIS   write user
        DESCRIPTIONwrite copies lines from your typewriter to that of another
                   user. When first called, write sends the message
                        message from  yourname...
                   The recipient of the message should write back at this
                   point. Communication continues until an end of file is read
                   from the typewriter or an interrupt is sent. At that point
                   write writes "EOT" on the other terminal.
                   Permission to write may be denied or granted by use of the
                   mesg command. At the outset writing is allowed. Certain
                   commands, in particular roff and pr, disallow messages in
                   order to prevent messy output.
                   If the character "!" is found at the beginning of a line,
                   write calls the mini—shell  msh to execute the rest of the
                   line as a command.
                   The following protocol is suggested for using write: When
                   you first write to another user, wait for him to write back
                   before starting to send. Each party should end each message
                   with a distinctive signal (“(o)” for “over is
                   conventional)that the other may reply. "(oo)" (for over and
                   out”) is suggested when conversation is about to be
                   terminated.
        FILES      /tmp/utmp is used to discover the target user's typewriter
                   channel and the sending users s name. msh is used to
                   execute commands.
        SEE ALSO   mesg
        DIAGNOSTICS"user not logged in"; "permission denied"
        BUGS
        OWNER      dmr, ken
