       11/3/71                                    AR (I)
       NAME        ar -- archive
       SYNOPSIS    ar key afile name1 ...
       DESCRIPTION ar maintains groups of files combined into a single archive
                   file. Its main use is to create and update library files as
                   used by the loader. It can be used, though, for any similar
                   purpose.
                   key is one character from the set drtux, optionally
                   concatenated with v.  afile is the archive file. The names
                   are constituent files in the archive file. The meanings of
                   the key characters are:
                   d means delete the named files from the archive file.
                   r means replace the named files in the archive file. If the
                   archive file does not exist, r will create it. If the named
                   files are not in the archive file, they are appended.
                   p prints a table of contents of the archive file. If no
                   names are given, all files in the archive are tabled. If
                   names are given, only those files are tabled.
                   u is similar to  r except that only those files that have
                   been modified are replaced. If no names are given, all files
                   in the archive that have been modified will be replaced by
                   the modified version.
                   x will extract the named files. If no names are given, all
                   files in the archive are extracted. In neither case does x
                   alter the archive file.
                   v means verbose. Under the verbose option, ar gives a file—
                   by—file description of the making of a new archive file from
                   the old archive and the constituent files. The following
                   abbreviations are used:
                             c copy
                             a append
                             d delete
                            r replace
                            x extract
       FILES       /tmp/vtma, vtmb ...temporary
       SEE ALSO    ld
       DIAGNOSTICS “Bad usage”, “ afile -- not in archive format”,
                   “cannot open temp file”, “name -- cannot open",
       11/3/71                                    AR (I)
                   “name -- phase error”, “name -- cannot create", “no archive
                   file”, “cannot create archive file”, “name -- not found”.
       BUGS       Option l (table with more information) should be
                   implemented.
                   There should be a way to specify the placement of a new file
                   in an archive. Currently, it is placed at the end.
       OWNER      ken, dmr
              11/3/71                                                                                AS (I)
              NAME                   as -- assembler
              SYNOPSIS               as name1 . . .
              DESCRIPTION            as assembles the concatenation of name          , .... as is based on
                                                                                    1
                                     the DEC—provided assembler PAL—11R [references], although it
                                     was coded locally. Therefore, only the differences will be
                                     recorded.
                                     Character changes are:
                                            for        use
                                            @          *
                                          #            $
                                           ;         /
                                     In as, the character “;“ is a logical new line; several
                                     operations may appear on one line if separated by “;”.
                                     Several new expression operators have been provided:
                                     \>          right shift (logical)
                                     \<          left shift
                                     *           multiplication
                                     \/          division
                                     %           remainder (no longer means “register”)
                                     !           one’s complement
                                     []          parentheses for grouping
                                     ^           result has value of left, type of right
                                     For example location 0 (      relocatable) can be written "0^.";
                                     another way to denote register 2 is “2^r0"
                                     All of the preceding operators are binary; if a left operand
                                     is missing, it is taken to be 0. The ! operator adds its left
                                     operand to the one’s complement of its right operand.
                                     There is a conditional assembly operation code different from
                                     that of PAL-11R (whose conditionals are not provided):
                                                             .if expression
                                                             ...
                                                           .end if
                                     If the expression evaluates to non-zero the section of code
                                     between the “.if” and the .      endif is assembled; otherwise it
                                     is ignored. “.if” s may be nested.
                                     Temporary labels like those introduced by           Knuth [reference]
                                     may be employed. A temporary label is defined as follows:
       11/3/71                                    AS (I)
                           n:
                  where n is a digit 0 ,.. 9. Symbols of the form “nf” refer to
                  the first label n: following the use of the symbol; those of
                  the form nb refer to the last “n:”. The same n may be used
                  many times. Labels of this form are less taxing both on the
                  imagination of the programmer and on the symbol table space
                  of the assembler.
                  The PAL-11R  opcodes “.eot” and “.end” are redundant and are
       omitted.
                   The symbols
                      r0 ... r5
                              sp
                              pc
                              ac
                              mq
                              div
                              mul
                              lsh
                              ash
                              nor
                              csw
                   are redefined with appropriate values. The symbol csw refers
                  to the console switches. “..” is the relocation constant and
                  is added to each  relocatable symbol; normally it is 40000(8);
                  it may be changed to assemble a section of code at a location
                  different from that in which it will be executed.
                  It is illegal to assign a value to “.”less than its current
                  value.
                  The new opcode “sys” is used to specify system calls. Names
                  for system calls are predefined. See the section on system
                  calls for their names.
                  Strings of characters may be assembled in a way more
                  convenient than PAL-11's “.ascii” operation (which is,
                  therefore, omitted). Strings are included between the string
                  quotes '<' and '>' :
                       <here is a string>
                  Escape sequences exist to enter non graphic and other
                  difficult characters. These sequences are also effective in
                  single and double character constants introduced by single
                  (') and double (“) quotes respectively.
       11/3/71                                    AS (I)
                             use for
                       \n newline (012)
                      \0  NULL (000)
                      \>  >
                      \t  TAB (011)
                      \\  \
                  The binary output of the assembler is placed on the file
                  a.out in the current directory. a.out also contains the
                  symbol table from the assembly and relocation bits. The
                  output of the assembler is executable immediately if the
                  assembly was error—free and if there were no unresolved
                  external references. The link editor ld may be used to
                  combine several assembly outputs and resolve global symbols.
                  The multiple location counter feature of PALIIR is not
                  supported.
                  The assembler does not produce a listing of the source
                  program. This is not a serious drawback; the debugger db
                  discussed below is sufficiently powerful to render a printed
                  octal translation of the source unnecessary.
       FILES      /etc/as2    pass 2 of the assembler
                  a.tmpl      temporary
                  a.tmp2      temporary
                  a.tmp3      temporary
                  a.out       object
       SEE ALSO   ld, nm, sh, un, db, a.out (format of output)
       DIAGNOSTICSWhen an input file cannot be read, its name followed by a
                  question mark is typed and assembly ceases.
                  When syntactic or semantic errors occur, a single—character
                  diagnostic is typed out together with the line number and the
                  file name in which it occurred. Errors in pass I cause
                  cancellation of pass 2. The possible errors are:
                  ) parentheses error ] parentheses error
                  * Indirection (“*") used illegally
                  A error in Address
                  B    Branch instruction has too remote an address
                  E error in Expression
                  F error in local ( or “b”) type symbol
                   G Garbage (unknown) character
                   M Multiply defined symbol as label
                   0   Odd—— word quantity assembled at odd
       11/3/71                                    AS (I)
                             address
                   P   Phase error “ ..” different in pass 2 from pass 1
                       value
                  R Relocation error
                  U Undefined symbol
                  X    syntaX error
       BUGS       Symbol table overflow is not checked.
       OWNER      dmr
           11/3/71                                 B (I)
       NAME        B -- language
       SYNOPSIS    sh rc /usr/b/rc name
       DESCRIPTION B is a language suitable for system programming. It is
                   described is a separate publication B reference manual.
                  The canned shell sequence in /usr/b/rc will compile the
                  program name.b into the executable file a.out. It involves
                  running the B compiler, the B assembler, the assembler and
                  the link editor. The process leaves the files name.i and
                  name.s in the current directory.
       FILES      name.b, name.i, name.s.
       SEE ALSO   /etc/bc, /etc/ba, /etc/brtl, /etc/brt2, / etc/bilib,
                   /etc/libb.a, B reference manual.
       DIAGNOSTICS see B reference manual
       BUGS       There should be a B command.
       OWNER      ken, dmr
       11/3/71                                   BAS (I)
       NAME        bas—— basic
       SYNOPSIS    bas[file]
       DESCRIPTIONbas is a dialect of basic. If a file argument is provided,
                   the file is used for input before the console is read.
                   bas accepts lines of the form:
                        statement
                        integer statement
                   Integer numbered statements (known as internal statements)
                  are stored for later execution. They are stored in sorted
                  ascending order. Non— numbered statements are immediately
                  executed. The result of an immediate expression statement
                  (that does not have ‘=‘ as its highest operator) is printed.
                   Statements have the following syntax: (expr is short for
                   expression)
                   expr
                       The expression is executed for its side effects
                       (assignment or function call) or for printing as
                       described above.
                              done
                       Return to system level.
                     draw expr expr expr
                       draw is used to draw on a 611—type storage scope
                       through a TSP— i plotter interface. The coordinates of
                       the scope face are zero to one in both the x and y
                       directions. ( Zero,zero being the lower left corner.)
                       The expressions are evaluated and design at— ed X, Y,
                       and Z. A line is drawn from the previous X, Y to the
                            •
                       new X, Y   If Z is non—zero, the line is visible,
                       otherwise the line is invisible.
                     for name = expr expr statement
                     for name = expr expr
                              .. .
                              next
                       The for statement repetatively executes a statement
                       (first form) or a group of statements (second form)
                       under control of a named variable. The variable takes
                       on the value of the first expression, then is
                       incremented by one on each loop, not to exceed the
                       value of the second expression.
           11/3/71                               BAS (I)
                            goto expr
                       The expression is evaluated, truncated to an integer
                       and execution goes to the corresponding integer
                       numbered statement. If executed from immediate mode,
                       the internal statements are compiled first.
                     if expr statement
                       The statement is executed if the expression
                       evaluates to non—zero.
                     list [ expr [expr]]
                       list is used to print out the stored internal
                       statements. If no arguments are given, all internal
                       statements are printed. If one argument is given, only
                       that internal statement is listed. If two arguments
                       are given, all internal statements inclusively between
                       the arguments are printed.
                            print expr
                       The expression is evaluated and printed.
                     return expr
                       The expression is evaluated and the result is passed
                       back as the value of a function call.
                              run
                       The internal statements are compiled. The symbol table
                       is re—initialized. The random number generator is re—
                       set. Control is passed to the lowest numbered internal
                       statement.
                  Expressions have the following syntax:
                              name
                       A name is used to specify a variable. Names are
                       composed of a letter (‘a’ — ‘z’) followed by letters
                       and digits. The first four characters of a name are
                       significant.
                             number
                       A number is used to represent a constant value. A
                       number is composed of digits, at most one decimal
                       point (’.’) and possibly a scale factor of the form e
                       digits or e— digits.
                             ( expr )
                       Parentheses are used to alter normal order
                       of evaluation.
                     expr op expr
                       Common functions of two arguments are
           11/3/71                               BAS (I)
                       abbreviated by the two arguments separated by an
                       operator denoting the function. A complete list of
                       operators is given below.
                     expr ( [expr [ , expr ]]
                     Functions of an arbitrary number of arguments can be
                       called by an expression followed by the arguments in
                       parentheses separated by commas. The expression
                       evaluates to the line number of the entry of the
                       function in the internally stored statements. This
                       causes the internal statements to be compiled. If the
                       expression evaluates negative, an builtin function is
                       called. The list of  builtin functions appears below.
                    name [ expr [ , expr ...] ]
                       Arrays are not yet implemented.
                   The following is the list of operators:
                       = is the assignment operator. The left operand must be
                       a name or an array element. The result is the right
                       operand. Assignment binds right to left, all other
                       operators bind left to right.
                       & |
                       & (logical and) has result zero if either of its
                       arguments are zero. It has result one if both its
                       arguments are non—zero.  | (logical or) has result
                       zero if both of its arguments are zero. It has result
                       one if -either of its arguments are non—zero.
                    < <= > >= == <>
                       The relational operators (< less than, <= less than or
                       equal, > greater than, >= greater than or equal, ==
                       equal to, <> not equal to) return one if their
                       arguments are in the specified relation. They return
                       zero otherwise. Relational operators at the same level
                       extend as follows: a>b>c is the same as a>b&b>c.
                              + -
                       Add and subtract.
                        * /
                       Multiply and divide.
                       ^
                       Exponeniation.
       11/3/71                                   BAS (I)
               -The following is a list of builtin functions:
                              arg
                       Arg(i) is the value of the ith actual parameter on the
                       current level of function call.
                              exp
                       Exp(x) is the exponential function of x.
                              log
                       Log(x) is the logarithm base of x.
                              sin
                       Sin(x) is the sine of x (radians).
                              co s
                       Cos(x) is the cosine of x (radians).
                              atn
                       Atn(x) is the  arctangent of x. (Not implemented.)
                              md
                       Rnd() is a uniformly distributed random
                       number between zero and one.
                              expr
                       Expr() is the only form of program input. A line is
                       read from the input and evaluated as an expression.
                       The resultant value is returned.
                              int
                       Int(x) returns x truncated to an integer.
                            •
       FILES      /tmp/btma, btmb  ..temporary
       SEE ALSO
       DIAGNOSTICSSyntax errors cause the incorrect line to be typed with an
                  underscore where the parse failed. All other diagnostics are
                  self explanatory.
       BUGS       Arrays [] are not yet implemented. In general, program
                   sizes, recursion,  etc are not checked, and cause trouble.
       OWNER      ken
           11/3/71                               BCD (I)
       NAME       bcd — binary coded decimal conversion
       SYNOPSIS   bcd [ string ]
       DESCRIPTIONbcd will convert a string into GECOS card code. If no
                   argument string is provided, will read a line and convert
                   it.
       FILES
       SEE ALSO
       DIAGNOSTICS
       BUGS
       OWNER      dmr
           11/3/71                               BOOT (I)
       NAME       boot -- reboot system
       SYNOPSIS   /etc/boot
       DESCRIPTIONboot logically a command, and is kept in /etc only to lessen
                  the probability of its being invoked by accident or from
                  curiosity. It reboots the system by jumping to the read—only
                  memory, which contains a disk boot program.
       FILES
       SEE ALSO    boot procedure
       DIAGNOSTICS
       BUGS       Should obviously not be executable by the general user.
                   Also, it should reboot in a more direct manner. The
                   mechanism invoked by jumping to the ROM loader is sensitive
                   to the contents of the console switches, which makes the
                   whole procedure even more dangerous.
                   Rather than jumping to the ROM, boot should simulate the ROM
                   action with 173700 in the switches. In this manner, It may
                   be used when the switches are not. set, and even in
                   installation without a ROM.
       OWNER       ken
                     11/3/71                                                                         CAT (I)
              NAME                   cat -- concatenate and print
              SYNOPSIS               cat file1  ...
                                                   
              DESCRIPTION            cat reads each file in sequence and writes it on the
                                     standard output stream. Thus:
                                                          cat file
                                     is about the easiest way to print a file. Also:
                                          cat filel file2 >file3
                                     is about the easiest way to concatenate files.
                                     If no input file is given       cat reads from the standard input
                                     file.
              FILES
              SEE ALSO               pr, cp
              DIAGNOSTICS            none; if a file cannot be found it is ignored.
              BUGS
              OWNER                  ken, dmr
           11/3/71                              CEDIR (I)
       NAME       chdir -- change working directory
       SYNOPSIS    chdir directory
       DESCRIPTION directory becomes the new working directory.
                   Because a new process is created to execute each command,
                  chdir would be ineffective if it were written as a normal
                  command. It is therefore recognized and executed by the
                  Shell.
       FILES
       SEE ALSO    sh
       DIAGNOSTICS ?
       BUGS
       OWNER       ken, dmr
           11/3/71                              CHECK (I)
       NAME        check -- file system consistency check
       SYNOPSIS    check [ filesystem [[ blockno 1 ... ] ]
       DESCRIPTIONcheck will examine  a file system, build a bit map of used
                   blocks, and compare this bit map against the bit map
                   maintained on the file system. If the file system is not
                   specified, a check of both /dev/rf0 and /dev/rk0 is
                   performed. Output includes the number of files on the file
                   system, the number of these that are ‘large’, the number of
                   used blocks, and the number of free blocks.
       FILES      /dev/rf0, /dev/rk0
       SEE ALSO   find
       DIAGNOSTICS Diagnostics are produced for blocks missing, duplicated, and
                   bad block addresses. Diagnostics are also produced for block
                   numbers passed as parameters. In each case, the block
                   number, i—number, and block class (i = inode, x indirect,  f
                   free) is printed.
       BUGS        The checking process is two pass in nature. If checking is
                   done on an active file system, extraneous diagnostics may
                   occur.
                   The swap space on the RF file system is not accounted for
                   and will therefore show up as ‘missing’.
       OWNER       ken, dmr
           11/3/71                              CHMOD (I)
       NAME        chmod -- change mode
       SYNOPSIS    chmod octal file
       DESCRIPTIONThe octal mode replaces the mode of each of the files. The
                  mode is constructed from the OR of the following modes:
                     01 write for non—owner
                     02 read for non—owner
                     04 write for owner
                     10 read for owner
                     20 executable
                     40 set—UID
                   Only the owner of a file may change its mode.
       FILES
       SEE ALSO    stat, ls
       DIAGNOSTICS
       BUGS
       OWNER      ken, dmr
       11/3/71                                  CHOWN (I)
       NAME        chown -- change owner
       SYNOPSIS    chown owner file
       DESCRIPTIONowner becomes the new owner of the files. The owner may be
                  either a decimal UID or a name found in /etc/uids.
                   Only the owner of a file is allowed to change the owner. It
                   is illegal to change the owner of a file with the set—user—
                   ID mode.
       FILES       /etc/uids
       SEE ALSO    stat
       DIAGNOSTICS
       BUGS
       OWNER       ken, dmr
       11/3/71                                   CMP (I)
       NAME       cmp -- compare two files
       SYNOPSIS   cmp file1 file2
       DESCRIPTIONThe two files are compared for identical contents.
                  Discrepancies are noted by giving the offset and the
                  differing words.
       FILES
       SEE ALSO
       DIAGNOSTICSMessages are given for inability to open either argument,
                  premature EOF on either argument, and incorrect usage.
       BUGS        If the two files differ in length by one byte, the extra
                   byte does not enter into the comparison.
       OWNER       dmr
       11/3/71                                    CP (I)
       NAME        cp -- copy
       SYNOPSIS   cp file12 file12 file21 file22 ...
       DESCRIPTIONFiles are taken in pairs; the first is opened for reading,
                   the second created mode 17. Then the first is copied into
                   the second.
       FILES
       SEE ALSO    cat, pr
       DIAGNOSTICSError returns are checked at every system call, and
                   appropriate diagnostics are produced.
       BUGS        The second file should be created in the mode of the first.
                  A directory convention as used in mv should be adopted to cp.
       OWNER      ken, dmr
           11/3/71                               DATE (I)
       NAME        date -- print the date
       SYNOPSIS    date
       DESCRIPTION The current date is printed to the second.
       FILES
       SEE ALSO    sdate
       DIAGNOSTICS
       BUGS
       OWNER       dmr
           11/3/71                                DB (I)
       NAME        db -- debug
       SYNOPSIS    db [ core [ namelist ] ]
       DESCRIPTIONUnlike many debugging packages (including DEC’s ODT, on which
                  db is loosely based)  db is not loaded as part of the core
                  image which it is used to examine; instead it examines files.
                  Typically, the file will be either a core image produced
                  after a fault or the binary output of the assembler. Core is
                  the file being debugged; if omitted "core" is assumed.
                  namelist is a file containing a symbol table. If it is
                  omitted, a.out is the default. If no appropriate name list
                  file can be found,  db can still be used but some of its
                  symbolic facilities become unavailable.
                   The format for most  db requests is an address followed by a
                   one character command.
                   Addresses are expressions built up as follows:
                     1. A name has the value assigned to it when the input
                       file was assembled. It may be relocatable or not
                       depending on the use of the name during the assembly.
                    2. An octal number is an absolute quantity with the
                       appropriate value.
                     3. An octal number immediately followed by "r" is a
                       relocatable quantity with the appropriate value.
                     4. The symbol "." indicates the current pointer of db.
                       The current pointer is set by many requests.
                    5. Expressions separated by “+“ or " "(blank) are
                       expressions with value equal to the sum of the
                       components. At most one of the components may be
                       relocatable.
                    6. Expressions separated by "—“ form an expression with
                       value equal to the difference to the components. If
                       the right component is relocatable, the left
                       component must be  relocatable.
                     7. Expressions are evaluated left to right. Names for
                   registers are built in:
                            r0 ... r5
                              sp
                              pc
           11/3/71                                DB (I)
                              ac
                              mq
                   These may be examined. Their values are deduced from the
                  contents of the stack in a core image file. They are
                  meaningless in a file that is not a core image.
                   If no address is given for a command, the current address
                   (also specified by ".") is assumed. In general, . points to
                   the last word or byte printed by ~.
                   There are db commands for examining locations interpreted as
                  octal numbers, machine instructions, ASCII characters, and
                  addresses. For numbers and characters, either bytes or words
                  may be examined. The following commands are used to examine
                  the specified file.
                     / The addressed word is printed in octal.
                    \  The addressed byte is printed in octal.
                       " The addressed word is printed as two ASCII
                       characters.
                       ' The addressed byte is printed as an ASCII character.
                     ‘ The addressed word is multiplied by 2, then printed in
                       octal (used with B programs,
                       whose addresses are word addresses).
                     ? The addressed word is interpreted as a machine
                       instruction and a symbolic form of the instruction,
                       including symbolic addresses, is printed. Usually, the
                       result will appear exactly as it was written in the
                       source program.
                     & The addressed word is interpreted as a symbolic
                       address and is printed as the name of the symbol whose
                       value is closest to the addressed word, possibly
                       followed by a signed offset.
                     <nl> (i. e., the character “new line”) This command
                                             •
                       advances the current location counter  and prints the
                       resulting location in the mode last specified by one
                       of the above requests.
                       This character decrements "." and prints the resulting
                       location in the mode last selected one of the above
                       requests. It is
           11/3/71                                DB (I)
                       a converse to < nl>.
                  It is illegal for the word—oriented commands to have odd
                  addresses. The incrementing and decrementing of "." done by
                  the <nl> and requests is by one or two depending on whether
                  the last command was word or byte oriented.
                  The address portion of any of the above commands may be
                  followed by a comma and then by an expression. In this case
                  that number of sequential words or bytes specified by the
                  expression is printed. "."is advanced so that it points at
                  the last thing printed.
                   There are two commands to interpret the value of
                   expressions.
                     = When preceded by an expression, the value of the
                       expression is typed in octal. When not preceded by an
                       expression, the value of. "." is indicated. This
                       command does not change the value of ".".
                     : An attempt is made to print the given expression as a
                       symbolic address. If the expression is relocatable,
                       that symbol is found whose value is nearest that of
                       the expression, and the symbol is typed, followed by a
                       sign and the appropriate offset. If the value of the
                       expression is absolute, a symbol with exactly the
                       indicated value is sought and printed if found; if no
                       matching symbol is discovered, the octal value of the
                       expression is given.
                  The following command may be used to patch the file being
                  debugged.
                     ! This command must be preceded by an expression. The
                       value of the expression is stored at the location
                       addressed by the current value of "." . The opcodes do
                       not appear in the symbol table, so the user must
                       assemble them by hand.
                  The following command is used after a fault has caused a core
                  image file to be produced.
                     $ causes the contents of the general registers and
                       several other registers to be printed both in octal
                       and symbolic format. The values are as they were at
                       the time of the fault.
           11/3/71                                DB (I)
                   The only way to exit from db is to generate an end of file
                   on the typewriter (EOT character).
       FILES
       SEE ALSO   as; core for format of core image.
                               "
       DIAGNOSTICS "File not found"  the first argument cannot be read;
                   otherwise "?"
       BUGS       Really, db should know about relocation bits, floating point
                   operations, and PDP11/45 instructions.
       OWNER       dmr
           11/3/71                              DBPPT (I)
       NAME        dbppt -- dump binary paper tape
       SYNOPSIS    dbppt name [ output ]
       DESCRIPTIONdbppt produces binary paper tape in UNIX standard format,
                   which includes checksums and a zero—suppression feature.
                   File name is dumped; if the output argument is not given,
                   output goes to / dev/ppt.
       FILES       /dev/ppt
       SEE ALSO   lbppt to reload the tapes.  bppt for binary paper tape
                   format.
       DIAGNOSTICS ?
       BUGS
       OWNER      ken
