        11/3/71                          SYS MOUNT (II)
     NAME       mount -- mount file system
     SYNOPSIS   sys mount; special; name / mount = 21.; not in assembler
     DESCRIPTIONmount announces to the system that a removable file system has been
                mounted on special file special; from now on, references to file name
                will refer to the root file on the newly mounted file system. Special
                and name are pointers to null—terminated strings containing the
                appropriate path names.
                Name must exist already. If it had useful contents, they are
                inaccessible while the file system is mounted.
                Almost always,  name should be a directory so that an entire file
                system, not just one file, may exist on the removable device.
     FILES
     SEE ALSO   umount
     DIAGNOSTICSError bit (c—bit) set if special is inaccessible or  dir does not
                exist.
     BUGS       At most one removable device can be mounted at a time. The use of
                this call should be restricted to the super—user.
     OWNER      ken, dmr
        11/3/71                            SYS OPEN (II)
     NAME       open -- open for reading or writing
     SYNOPSIS   sys   open; name; mode / open = 5.
                (descriptor in r0)
     DESCRIPTIONopen opens the file  name for reading (if mode is 0) or writing (if
                mode is non—zero),  name is the address of a string of ASCII
                characters representing a path name, terminated by a null character.
                The file descriptor should be saved for subsequent calls to read (or
                write) and close.
                In both the read and write case the file pointer is set to the
                beginning of the file.
                If the last link to an open file is removed, the file is not
                destroyed until it is closed.
     FILES
     SEE ALSO   creat, read, write, close
     DIAGNOSTICSThe error bit (c—bit) is set if the file does not exist, if one of
                the necessary directories does not exist or is unreadable, or if the
                file is not readable.
     B UGS
     OWNER      ken, dmr
        11/3/71                            SYS QUIT (II)
     NAME       quit -- turn off quit signal
     SYNOPSIS   sys   quit; flag / quit = 26.
     DESCRIPTIONWhen flag is 0, this call disables quit signals from the typewriter
                (ASCII FS). When  flag is 1, quits are re—enabled, and cause execution
                to cease and a core image to be produced. When flag is an address in
                the program, a quit causes control to be sent to that address.
                Quits should be turned off only with due consideration.
     FILES
     SEE ALSO   sys intr turns off interrupts
     DIAGNOSTICS
     BUGS
     OWNER      ken, dmr
        11/3/71                            SYS READ (II)
     NAME       read -- read from file
     SYNOPSIS   (file descriptor in r0)
                sys   read; buffer;  nchars/ read = 3.
                (nread in r0)
     DESCRIPTIONA file descriptor is a word returned from a successful open call.
                Buffer is the location of  nchars contiguous bytes into which the
                input will be placed. It is not guaranteed that all nchars bytes
                will be read, however; for example if the file refers to a
                typewriter at most one line will be returned. In any event the
                number of characters read is returned in r0.
                If r0 returns with value 0, then end—of—file has been reached.
     FILES
     SEE ALSO   open
     DIAGNOSTICS As, r0 is 0 on return when the end of the file has been reached. If the
                read was otherwise unsuccessful the error bit (c—bit) is set. Many
                conditions, all rare, can generate an error: physical I/O errors, bad
                buffer address, preposterous nchars, file descriptor not that of an
                input file.
     BUGS
     OWNER      ken, dmr
        11/3/71                            SYS RELE (II)
     NAME       rele -- release processor
     SYNOPSIS   sys   rele / rele = 0; not in assembler
     DESCRIPTIONThis call causes the process to be swapped out immediately if another
                process wants to run. Its main reason for being is internal to the
                system, namely to implement timer—runout swaps. However, it can be
                used beneficially by programs which wish to loop for some reason
                without consuming more processor time than necessary.
     FILES
     SEE ALSO
     DIAGNOSTICS
     BUGS
     OWNER      ken, dmr
        11/3/71                            SYS SEEK (II)
     NAME       seek -- move read/write pointer
     SYNOPSIS   (file descriptor in r0)
                sys   seek; offset;  ptrname/ seek = 19.
     DESCRIPTIONThe file descriptor refers to a file open for reading or writing. The
                read (or write) pointer for the file is set as follows:
                  if ptrname is 0, the pointer is set to offset.
                  if ptrname is 1, the pointer is set to its current location plus
                  offset.
                  if ptrname is 2, the pointer is set to the size of the file plus
                  offset.
     FILES
     SEE ALSO   tell
     DIAGNOSTICSThe error bit (c—bit) is set for an undefined file descriptor.
     BUGS       A file can conceptually be as large as 2**20 bytes. Clearly only
                2**16 bytes can be addressed by seek. The problem is most acute on
                the tape files and RK and RF. Something is going to be done about
                this.
     OWNER      ken, dmr
     11/3/71                              SYS SETUID (II)
     NAME       setuid -- set process ID
     SYNOPSIS   (process ID in r0)
                sys   setuid     / setuid = 23.
     DESCRIPTIONThe user ID of the current process is set to the argument in r0.
                Both the effective and the real user ID are set. This call is only
                permitted to the super—user.
     FILES
     SEE ALSO   getuid
     DIAGNOSTICSError bit (c—bit) is set if the current user ID is not that of the
                super—user.
     BUGS
     OWNER      ken, dmr
        11/3/71                          SYS SMDATE (II)
     NAME       smdate -- set modified date on file
     SYNOPSIS   (time to AC—MQ)
                sys smdate; file /  smdate = 30.; not in assembler
     DESCRIPTIONFile is the address of a null—terminated string giving the name of a
                file. The modified time of the file is set to the time given in the
                AC—MQ registers.
                This call is allowed only to the super—user.
     FILES
     SEE ALSO
     DIAGNOSTICSError bit is set if the user is not the super— user or if the file
                cannot be found.
     BUGS
     OWNER      ken, dmr
        11/3/71                           SYS STAT (II)
     NAME       stat -- get file status
     SYNOPSIS   sys   stat; name;  buf / stat = 18.
     DESCRIPTIONname points to a null—terminated string naming a file; buf is the
                address of a 34(10) byte buffer into which information is placed
                concerning the file. It is unnecessary to have any permissions at all
                with respect to the file, but all directories leading to the file
                must be readable.
                After stat, buf has the following format:
                buf, +1     i—number
                +2, +3      flags (see below)
                +4          number of links
                +5            user ID of owner size in bytes
                +6,+7     size in bytes
                +8,+9     first indirect block or contents block
                ...
                +22,+23     eighth indirect block or contents block
                +24,+25,+26,+27 creation time
                +28,+29, +30,+31 modification time
                   +32,+33  unused
                The flags are as follows:
                   100000used (always on)
                   040000directory
                   020000file has been modified (always on)
                   010000large file
                   000040set user ID
                   000020executable
                   000010read, owner
                   000004write, owner
                   000002read, non—owner
                   000001write, non—owner
     FILES
     SEE ALSO   fstat
     DIAGNOSTICSError bit (c—bit) is set if the file cannot be found.
     BUGS       The format is going to change someday.
     OWNER      ken, dmr
     11/3/71                               SYS STIME (II)
     N AME      stime -- set time
     SYNOPSIS   (time in AC—MQ)
                sys   stime / stime = 25.; not in assembler
     DESCRIPTIONstime sets the system’s idea of the time and date. Only the super—
                user may use this call.
     FILES
     SEE ALSO   sys time
     DIAGNOSTICSError bit (c—bit) set if user is not the super— user.
     BUGS
     OWNER      ken, dmr
        11/3/71                           SYS STTY (II)
     NAME       stty -- set mode of typewriter
     SYNOPSIS   (file descriptor in r0)
                sys stty; arg / stty = 31.; not in assembler
            arg:dcrsr; dcpsr; mode
     DESCRIPTIONstty sets mode bits for a typewriter whose file descriptor is passed
                in r0. First, the system delays until the typewriter is quiescent.
                Then, the argument  dcrsr is placed into the typewriter’s reader
                control and status register, and dcpsr is placed in the printer
                control and status register. The DC—11 manual must be consulted for
                the format of these words. For the purpose of this call, the most
                important role of these arguments is to adjust to the speed of the
                typewriter.
                The mode arguments contains several bits which determine the system’s
                treatment of the typewriter:
                  200 even (M37  tty) parity allowed
                  100 odd (non—M37  tty) allowed
                  040 raw mode: wake up on all characters
                  020 map CR into LF; echo LF or CR as CR—LF
                  010 don’t echo (half duplex)
                  004 map upper case to lower case on input (M33 TTY)
                Characters with the wrong parity, as determined by bits 200 and 100,
                are ignored.
                In raw mode, every character is passed back immediately to the
                program. No erase or kill processing is done; the end—of—file
                character (EOT), the interrupt character (DELETE) and the quit
                character (FS) are not treated specially.
                Mode 020 causes input carriage returns to be turned into new—lines;
                input of either CR or LF causes CR—LF both to be echoed (used for GE
                TermiNet 300’s).
     FILES
     SEE ALSO   gtty
     DIAGNOSTICSThe error bit (c—bit) is set if the file descriptor does not refer
                to a typewriter.
     BUGS       This call should be used with care. It is all too easy to turn off
                your typewriter.
     OWNER      ken, dmr
        11/3/71                            SYS TELL (II)
     NAME       tell -- get file pointer
     SYNOPSIS   (file descriptor in r0)
                sys   tell; offset;  ptrname/ tell = 20.
                (value returned in r0)
     DESCRIPTIONThe file descriptor refers to an open file. The value returned in r0
                is one of:
                  if ptrname is 0, the value returned is offset;
                  if ptrname is 1, the value is the current
                  pointer plus  offset
                  if ptrname is 2, the value returned is the
                  number of bytes in the file plus offset.
     FILES
     SEE ALSO   seek
     DIAGNOSTICSThe error bit (c—bit) is set if the file descriptor is unknown.
     BUGS       Tell doesn’t work. Complain if you need it.
     OWNER      ken, dmr
     11/3/71                               SYS TIME (II)
     NAME       time -- get time of year
     SYNOPSIS   sys   time  / time = 13.
                (time AC—MQ)
     DESCRIPTIONtime returns the time since 00:00:00, Jan. 1, 1971, measured in
                sixtieths of a second. The high order word is in the AC register and
                the low order is in the MQ.
     FILES
     SEE ALSO
     DIAGNOSTICS
     BUGS       The chronological—minded user will note that 2**32 sixtieths of a
                second is only about 2.5 years.
     OWNER      ken, dmr
        11/3/71                          SYS UMOUNT (II)
     NAME       umount -- dismount file system
     SYNOPSIS   sys umount; special /  umount = 22.; not in assembler
     DESCRIPTIONumount announces to the system that special file special is no longer
                to contain a removable file system. The file associated with the
                special file reverts to its ordinary interpretation (see mount).
                The user must take care that all activity on the file system has
                ceased.
     FILES
     SEE ALSO   mount
     DIAGNOSTICSError bit (c—bit) set if no file system was mounted on the special
                file.
     BUGS       Use of this call should be restricted to the super—user.
     OWNER      ken, dmr
        11/3/71                           SYS UNLINK (II)
     NAME       unlink -- remove directory entry
     SYNOPSIS   sys   unlink; name/ unlink = 10.
     DESCRIPTIONName points to a null—terminated string. Unlink removes the entry for
                the file pointed to by name from its directory. If this entry was the
                last link to the file, the contents of the file are freed and the
                file is destroyed. If, however, the file was open in any process, the
                actual destruction is delayed until it is closed, even though the
                directory entry has disappeared.
     FILES
     SEE ALSO   link
     DIAGNOSTICSThe error bit (c—bit) is set to indicate that the file does not exist
                or that its directory cannot be written. Write permission is not
                required on the file itself. It is also illegal to unlink a directory
                (except for the super—user).
     BUGS       Probably writ e permission should be required to remove the last link
                to a file, but this gets in other problems (namely, one can donate an
                undeletable file to someone else).
                If the system crashes while a file is waiting to be deleted because
                it is open, the space is lost.
     OWNER      ken, dmr
        11/3/71                            SYS WAIT (II)
     NAME       wait -- wait for process to die
     SYNOPSIS   sys   wait       / wait = 7.
                (process ID in r0)
     DESCRIPTIONwait causes its caller to delay until one of its child processes
                terminates. If any child has already died, return is immediate; if
                there are no children, return is immediate with the error bit set. In
                the case of several children several waits are needed to learn of all
                the deaths.
     FILES
     SEE ALSO   fork
     DIAGNOSTICSerror bit (c—bit) on if no children not previously waited for.
     BUGS       A child which dies but is never waited for is not really gone in that
                it still consumes disk swap and system table space. This can make it
                impossible to create new processes. The bug can be noticed when
                several & separators are given to the shell not followed by an
                command without an ampersand. Ordinarily things clean themselves up
                when an ordinary command is typed, but it is possible to get into a
                situation in which no commands are accepted, so no waits are done;
                the system is then hung.
                The fix, probably, is to have a new kind of fork which creates a
                process for which no  wait is necessary (or possible); also to limit
                the number of active or inactive descendants allowed to a process.
     OWNER      ken, dmr
        11/3/71                            SYS WRITE (II)
     NAME       write —— write, on file
     SYNOPSIS   (file descriptor in r0)
                sys   write; buffer;  nchars/ write = 4.
                (number written in r0)
     DESCRIPTIONA file descriptor is a word returned from a successful open or creat
                call.
                buffer is the address of nchars contiguous bytes which are written on
                the output file. The number of characters actually written is
                returned in r0. It should be regarded as an error if this is not the
                same as requested.
                For disk and tape files, writes which are multiples of 512 characters
                long and begin on a 512—byte boundary are more efficient than any
                others.
     FILES
     SEE ALSO   sys creat, sys open
     DIAGNOSTICSThe error bit (c—bit) is set on an error: bad descriptor, buffer
                address, or count. physical I/o errors;
     BUGS
     OWNER      ken, dmr
